---
order: 2
title: The Relationship of Revelation to True Experience
description: Second article in the nine article series called The Normal Christian Life by Watchman Nee. This article was released in the January-February 1941 issue of a Witness and a Testimony.
layout: article
citation:
  year: 1941
  pages: 16-20
  pdfUrl: http://www.austin-sparks.net/pdf/searchable/AWAT1941.pdf#page=16&zoom=auto,-113,365
  accessDate: 17 Nov. 2021
---

READING:
[Romans 6:1-11](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Rom.6.1-Rom.6.11){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}

The death of the Lord Jesus is inclusive. The resurrection of the Lord Jesus is
also inclusive. In
[1 Cor 5:1](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=1Cor.5.1){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}
the Lord is spoken of as the last Adam and the second Man. The Scripture does
not refer to him as the second Adam, but as the last Adam; nor does it refer to
Him as the last Man, but as the second Man. As the last Adam He is the sum total
of humanity; as the second Man He is the Head of a new race. As the last Adam He
gathers up into Himself all that was in Adam; as the second Man, having by His
Cross done away with the first man in whom God's purpose was frustrated, He
brings in another Man in whom that purpose is fully realized. When He was
crucified on the Cross He was crucified as the last Adam. All that was in the
first Adam was done away within the last Adam. We were all included in His
death. As the last Adam He puts away the old race; as the second Man He brings
in a new race. It is in His resurrection that He stands as the second Man. We
died in Him as the last Adam; we live in Him as the second Man. Our old history
ends with the Cross; our new history begins with the resurrection. "Wherefore if
any man is in Christ, there is a new creation; the old things are passed away;
behold, they are become new"
([2 Cor. 5:17](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=2Cor.5.17){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"},
R.V.M.). The Cross terminates the first creation, and out of death there is
brought in a new creation in Christ, the second Man. If we are "in Adam" all
that is "in Adam" becomes ours by "free grace"! There is no need to make up our
minds to lose our temper or commit any other sin; it all comes to us freely and
despite ourselves. Likewise, if we are "in Christ", all that is in Christ comes
to us by "free grace", without any effort on our part.

## The Necessity for Revelation

Romans 6 shows that the death of the Lord Jesus is inclusive. In His death we
all died. None of us can progress spiritually without seeing this. If we have
not seen Him bearing our sins on the Cross we cannot have justification; if we
have not seen Him bearing us on the Cross we cannot have sanctification. Not
only have our sins been put on Him, but we ourselves have been put in Him. How
did you get forgiveness? You realized the Lord Jesus died and bore your sins on
Himself, that His Blood was shed to cleanse away your defilement. When you saw
your sins all taken away on the Cross, what did you do? Did you pray? Did you
say, "Lord Jesus, come and die for my sins?" No, you did not pray at all, you
only thanked the Lord. You did not beseech Him to come and die for you, you
thanked Him because He had already died in your stead. Now, what is true of your
forgiveness is also true of your deliverance. The work is done; therefore there
is no need to pray, but only to praise. God has put us all in Christ, so that
when Christ was crucified we were crucified too. It is done. Thus there is no
need to pray, "I am a very wicked person, Lord please crucify me". That is all
wrong. You did not pray about your sins; why then pray about yourself? Your sins
were dealt with by His Blood, and you were dealt with by His Cross. It is done.
All that is left for you to do is to praise the Lord. When Christ died, you
died; you died in Him. Do you believe in the death of the Lord? Of course you
do. Well, the same Scripture that says He died for us, says that we died with
Him. "Knowing this, that our old man was crucified with Him"
([Romans 6:6](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Rom.6.6){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}).
I could turn it round and say, Christ has been crucified with our old man. Some
of you came here in twos. You might say, My friend came with me; but you might
also say, I came with my friend. In history, (not in doctrine) we can say with
equal truth, I was crucified with Christ, or, Christ was crucified with me. Has
Christ been crucified? Then can I be uncrucified? I believe in the death of the
Lord Jesus, and I believe in my own death just as surely as I believe in His.
This is the Gospel. Why do you believe the Lord Jesus died? Because you feel He
has died? No, you have never felt it. You believe He has died because God has
declared it to be a fact. How do you know the thief of the cross was crucified?
Because the Word of God tells you so. You believe in the death of the Lord, and
you believe in the death of the thief; now, what about your own death? Have you
died? How can you know? You can know, for the simple reason that God has said
so. If you feel Christ has died, He has died, and if you do not feel He has
died, He has died. If you feel you have died, you have died, and if you do not
feel you have died, you have died. These are Divine facts. That Christ has died
is a fact, that the thief has died is a fact, and that you have died is a fact
also. Let me tell you, you have died. You are done with! You are ruled out! This
is the Gospel for Christians.

Our crucifixion can never be made effective by will or by effort, but only by
accepting what the Lord Jesus did on the Cross. Our eyes must be opened to see
the finished work of Calvary. After my conversion I studied the Scriptures and
knew that the Lord Jesus had died, and knew that I must die too; for I was too
bad to live. So I tried to die, I tried to live as though I had died. With what
result? The same old temper showed itself, the same old sins; there was no
deliverance. For seven years after my conversion, despite all my efforts to die,
I still could not enter into the experience of the death of Christ. One day I
was upstairs sitting at my desk reading the Word and praying, when the Lord
opened my eyes, and I saw that I died when the Lord died; and from that day the
question of my death has been a matter of the past, not of the future. I can
always look back and see my death as an accomplished fact. When I made this
great discovery I jumped up from my chair, rushed downstairs, laid hold of my
cook and said, "Do you know that I have died?" He looked puzzled; so I went on,
"Do you know that Christ has died? Do you know that I am just as dead as Christ?
Do you know that Christ is not a tiny bit more dead than I?" From that day to
this I have never for one moment doubted my own death. Friends, this is the
first step into a normal Christian life. If we are to live such a life our first
need is of revelation. May God open our eyes to see what He has done for us in
His Son

## The Fruit of Revelation

Some of you, prior to your salvation, may have tried to save yourselves. You
read the Bible, prayed, went to church, gave alms. Then one day your eyes were
opened and you saw that a full salvation had already been provided for you on
the Cross. You just accepted that and thanked the Lord, and peace and joy flowed
into your heart. Now, salvation and sanctification are on exactly the same
basis. You receive deliverance in the same way as you receive forgiveness of
sins. For years maybe you have tried to exercise control over yourself, and
improve yourself, but all to no purpose. When you see the truth you will cease
to do anything. Revelation stops all human effort. In writing to the Romans,
Paul said, "Knowing this, that our old man was crucified with Him"
([Romans 6:6](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Rom.6.6){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}).
Do you know this? The whole question of deliverance begins with knowing. Without
knowing you cannot have deliverance. The first four chapters of Romans speak of
faith, and faith and faith. Without faith no one can have forgiveness of sins
and justification. In the next four chapters you find no mention of this kind of
faith. The condition of living the normal Christian life is (1) Knowing, (2)
Yielding, (3) Walking in the Spirit. Living a normal Christian life must begin
with a very definite "knowing"; not just knowing something about the truth, not
just understanding some doctrine, not a mere intellectual knowledge, but an
opening of the eyes of the heart to see what we have in Christ. When you have
seen, then you know beyond all possibility of doubt.

How do you know your sins are forgiven? Because your Pastor told you so? No, you
just know it! If I ask, "How do you know," you simply answer, "I know it!" Such
knowledge comes by revelation. You know it in your own heart, you see it in your
own spirit. A light has shined into your inner being, and you are persuaded of
the fact. It is not because anyone has told you, and not even because Romans 6
tells you. That would not be good enough. You know it because God has revealed
it in your heart. You may not feel it, and you may not understand it; but you
know it, for you have seen it. Once you have really seen yourself in Christ,
then nothing can shake your assurance of the fact.

Now, if you ask a number of believers who have entered into the normal Christian
life how they came by their experience, some will say this way and some will say
that. Each stresses his own particular way of entering in and produces scripture
to support his experience; and unfortunately many Christians are using their
special experiences and their special scriptures to fight other Christians. The
fact of the matter is, that whilst Christians may enter into the deeper life by
different ways, we need not regard the experiences or doctrines they stress as
mutually exclusive, but rather as complementary one to the other.

The second half of the first section of Romans speaks of three different steps
by which we enter into the fuller life. If we would live a normal Christian
life, then we must take all three steps; not one, or two, but all three. The
first step is revelation; revelation, that is to say, not of myself, but of the
work of the Lord Jesus on the Cross. When Hudson Taylor entered into the normal
Christian life it was thus he entered in. He had first tried to get into Christ,
but had found himself always slipping out, so to speak. When the Lord showed him
he was already in Christ as the branch in the vine, he no longer tried to get
in, but could praise the Lord he was in. Think of the bewilderment of trying to
get into a room in which you already are. Think of the absurdity of asking to be
put in. If I recognize the fact that I am in, I make no effort to enter. If we
had more revelation we should have fewer prayers. Much of our praying is just
because we are blind. Once I was sitting with a co-worker seeking to lead a man
into the fuller life. Said the man, "The best a man can do is to pray". But if
God has already given you everything, what do you need to pray for? we asked.
"He hasn't", the man replied, "for I am still losing my temper, still failing
constantly: so I must pray more". I said, Well, do you get what you pray for? "I
am sorry to say I do not get anything", he said. I tried to point out that just
as he had done nothing for his justification, so he need do nothing for his
sanctification. Then my co-worker said, What is this on the table? "A flask."
Can you imagine this flask praying, Lord, will You have mercy on me and make me
into a flask. "It would be nonsense to pray like that", the man said; "it is a
flask". Well, said my co-worker, you are dead! You are crucified! Why pray to
become dead? Why pray to be crucified? It is just as absurd. You do not need to
pray to the Lord to do anything, you merely need your eyes opened to see that He
has done all. That is the point. We need not work to die, we need not wait to
die, we are dead. We only need to recognize what the Lord has already done, and
praise Him for it.

## The Cross Deals with the Root Cause

Now, suppose the Government should wish to deal drastically with the question of
strong drink, and decide that the whole country shall go dry, how could the
decision be carried into effect? How could we help? If we were to search every
shop and house throughout the land and smash all the bottles of wine, or beer,
or brandy we came across, would that meet the case? We might rid the land of
every drop of alcoholic liquor it contains, but behind these bottles of strong
drink are the factories that produce them, and if we only deal with the bottles
and leave the factories untouched, there is no permanent solution to the
problem. The drink-producing factories must be destroyed if the drink question
is to be permanently settled.

We are the factory, our actions are the products. The Blood of the Lord Jesus
dealt with the question of the products, namely, with our sins. The question of
what we have done is settled; but what about the question of what we are? Our
sins were produced by us. Our sins have been dealt with, but how are we going to
be dealt with? Do you believe the Lord would cleanse away all our sins, and then
leave us to put away the sin-producing factory? Do you believe He will put away
the goods produced, but leave us to deal with the source of production? No, He
has done away with the goods and also done away with the factory that produces
the goods.

## On "Knowing" and "Reckoning"

Note again
[Romans 6:6](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Rom.6.6){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}.
The tense is most precious, for it is the "once-for-all" tense. The thing is
done and it cannot be undone. Our old man has been crucified once for all, and
he can never be uncrucified. This is what we need to know. When we know this,
what will follow? Verse 11, in which we have the exhortation, "Reckon ye also
yourselves to be dead unto sin", is the natural sequence to verse 6. When we
know that our old man has been crucified we shall spontaneously reckon ourselves
to be dead. When we know, then reckoning follows naturally. But we must not lay
too much emphasis on the matter of reckoning. People are always trying to reckon
without knowing. They have not had revelation first, yet they try to reckon, and
soon they get into all sorts of difficulties. When temptation comes they begin
to reckon furiously–"I'm dead, I'm dead, I'm dead"; but in the very act of
reckoning they lose their temper. Then they say, It won't work;
[Romans 6:11](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Rom.6.11){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}
is no good. Of course
[Romans 6:11](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Rom.6.11){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}
is no good without
[Romans 6:6](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Rom.6.6){:target="_blank"}{:rel="noopener"}.

What does reckoning mean? Reckoning is the only accurate thing a person can do.
An artist paints a landscape. Can he do it with perfect accuracy? In history,
who would vouch for the absolute accuracy of any record, or in geography for the
perfect correctness of any map? Even in our everyday speech, when we try to tell
some incident, with the best intentions to be honest and truthful we cannot
speak with perfect accuracy. What then can a man do that is utterly reliable?
Arithmetic! There is no scope for error there. One chair plus one chair equals
two chairs. That is true in Helsingor and it is just as true in Copenhagen. If
you travel south to Berlin or north to Oslo it is still the same. All the world
over and for all time one plus one equals two. One plus one equals two in heaven
and earth and hell. Why does God say we are to reckon ourselves dead? Because we
are dead. If I have Kr. 15.00 in my pocket, what do I enter in my account-book?
Can I enter Kr. 14.00 or Kr. 16.00? No, I must enter in my account-book that
which is a fact in my pocket. It is because I am really dead that God tells me
to count it so. God could not ask me to put down in my account-book that I am
dead if I am still alive. Reckoning does not mean that I have only Kr. 14.00 in
my pocket, but hope by entering Kr. 15.00 in my account-book that such reckoning
will make up the deficiency. If I have not got Kr. 15.00, yet try to reckon–"I
have Kr. 15.00; I have Kr. 15.00; I have Kr. 15.00;" will such reckoning affect
the fact that I have only Kr. 14 in my pocket? Reckoning will not make nothing
into Kr. 15, nor will it make Kr. 14 into Kr. 15. But if it is a fact that you
have Kr. 15 in your pocket, then with great ease and assurance you can enter Kr.
15 in your account-book.

After you reckon yourself dead with Christ, the Devil will come and say, "There
is something moving inside; what about it? Can you call that death?" What will
you say then? Now, you must choose! Will you believe Satan's lie or God's truth?
(We are not here denying the reality of the "flesh", but speaking of being moved
from a revealed position and fact, namely, our death with Christ.) I may not
feel that I am Mr. Nee, I may even forget that I am Mr. Nee, I may even dream
that I am not Mr. Nee; but when I am sleeping I am Mr. Nee, and when I am awake
I am Mr. Nee; when I remember it I am Mr. Nee, and when I forget it I am still
Mr. Nee. It is a fact which nothing I experience or fail to experience, can
alter. So also, whether I feel it or not, I am dead with Christ. Whether my
experience proves it or disproves it, the fact remains unchanged. If you stand
on that fact, then Satan cannot prevail against you. If you have any doubt about
the fact, Satan will surely get you; but if you have no doubt, then it does not
matter what Satan does, you can well afford to laugh at him. If anyone should
try to persuade me that I am not Mr. Nee, I could well afford to do the same.
Let. us, then, hold fast to the fact that when Christ died, we died also.
