---
order: 3
title: The Divide of the Cross
description: Third article in the nine article series called The Normal Christian Life by Watchman Nee. This article was released in the March-April 1941 issue of a Witness and a Testimony.
layout: article
citation:
  year: 1941
  pages: 52-55
  pdfUrl: http://www.austin-sparks.net/pdf/searchable/AWAT1941.pdf#page=52&zoom=auto,-127,311
  accessDate: 17 Nov. 2021
---

READING: Romans 6:1-5

The kingdom of this world is not the kingdom of God. The first creation has
become, "the old creation", and God is out for a second and "new creation", He
is bringing in a new creation, a new kingdom, and a new world, and nothing of
the old creation, the old kingdom, or the old world, can be transferred to the
new.

In order to bring us into this new sphere God must make us new creatures. Unless
we are made anew we can never fit into the new realm. "That which is born of the
flesh is flesh" (John 3:6). However educated, however cultivated, however
improved, it is still flesh. Our fitness for the new kingdom is determined by
the creation to which we belong. Do we belong to the old creation or the new?
Are we born of the flesh or of the Spirit? Our ultimate fitness for the new
realm hinges on the question of origin. The question is not "good or bad", but
"flesh or Spirit"; "that which is born of the flesh is flesh", and it will never
be anything else. That which is of the old creation can never enter the new
kingdom.

Once we really see what God is after—something altogether new for Himself—then
we shall see clearly that we can never bring anything from the old realm into
the new. God wanted to have us for Himself, but He could not bring us as we were
into that, which He had purposed; so He first did away with us by the Cross of
Christ and then by the Resurrection provided a new life for us. Being now a new
creation with a new nature, we can enter the new kingdom and the new world. The
Cross was the means God used to set us aside altogether, and the Resurrection
the means He used to impart to us all that was necessary for our life in the new
sphere. The greatest negative in the universe is the Cross, for with it God
wiped out everything that was not of Himself; the greatest positive in the
universe is the Resurrection, for through it God brought into being all He wants
for the new creation. The Resurrection stands at the beginning of the new
creation. It is a blessed thing to see that the Cross ends all that pertains to
the first regime, and the Resurrection introduces all that pertains to the
second. Everything that had its beginning before resurrection must be wiped out.
Resurrection is God's new starting point.

We have now two worlds before us, the new and the old. In the old Satan has
absolute dominion. You may be a good man in the old creation, but as Jong as you
belong to the old you are doomed to the Cross; because nothing of the old can be
transferred to the new. The Cross is God's declaration that all of the old
creation must die. Nothing of the old Adam can pass beyond the Cross; it all
ends there. The sooner we see that everything we derive from Adam has gone to
the Cross, the better. By the Cross, God has made a way of escape for us from
the old creation. God gathered up in His Son all that was of Adam and crucified
him; so in Him all that was of Adam was done away. God made a proclamation
throughout the universe—Through the Cross I have crucified all that was not of
Me. You who belong to the old creation have all been crucified with Christ.

"Or are ye ignorant that all we who were baptized into Christ Jesus were
baptized into his death? We were buried, therefore with him through baptism into
his death" (Romans 6:3-4). What is the meaning of baptism? It is not just a
question of a cup of water, nor even of a baptistry of water. Baptism is a
tremendous thing, for it relates both to the Cross and to the Resurrection of
our Lord. Peter in his first epistle refers to baptism as the answer of a good
conscience toward God (1 Peter 3 21). Now we cannot answer without being spoken
to. If God had said nothing, we should have nothing to answer. But He has
spoken: He has spoken to us by the Cross. By the Cross He has told of His
judgment of us, of the world, of the old creation and of the old kingdom; The
Cross of Christ is not just an individual Cross, but a corporate Cross, an
all-inclusive Cross. God has put us all into His Son and crucified us in Him. In
the last Adam, He has wiped out all that was of the first Adam. Now, what is my
answer to God's verdict on the old creation? I answer by asking for baptism.
Why? In Romans 6:4 Paul explains that baptism means burial. Baptism is connected
both with death and resurrection; but in itself it is neither death nor
resurrection, it is burial. But who are qualified for burial? Only the dead. So
if I ask for baptism I proclaim myself dead and only fit for the grave. My
request for baptism means that I say "Yes" to the death to which God has
committed me. I say, "Lord, I believe you have done the crucifying, now I ask
for the burying." He has consigned me to death, I ask to be consigned to the
grave.

In China a woman lost her husband, but she flatly refused to have him buried.
Day after day for a fortnight he lay in the house. She said, "He is not dead; I
talk with him every night". She was unwilling to have him buried, because she
did not believe him dead. When are we willing to bury our dear ones? Only when
we are absolutely sure that they have passed away, While you have the tiniest
hope that they are alive you will never bury them. When will I ask for baptism?
When I see that God's way is perfect, when I recognize that I deserve to die,
and when I truly believe that God has already crucified me. Once I am fully
persuaded that, before God, I am quite dead then I apply for baptism. I say in
effect, "Praise the Lord, I am dead. Lord, you have slain me, now I desire to be
put in the grave". In China we have a "Red Cross", and a "Blue Cross"; the first
deals with those who are still alive, and the second with those who are already
dead—those who have died in famine, flood, or war. The Lord has given us a "Red
Cross" and a "Blue Cross", and we must accept both. God has done the work of
crucifying, but we must seal that death by burial.

There is an old world and a new world, and between the two there is a tomb. God
has already crucified me, but I must consent to be consigned to that tomb. My
burial confirms God's sentence passed upon me in the Cross of His Son. It cuts
me off from the old world and prepares me for the new. So baptism is no small
thing. Paul, in effect, says, "If you could continue in the old world, why be
baptized? You should never have been baptized if you meant to live in the old
realm". Baptism makes the ground clear for the new creation by seeing to the
burial of the old creation. Paul still referring to those who have been
baptized, speaks of being "united with him in the likeness of his death" (Romans
6:5). By baptism we acknowledge union with Christ in His death.

One day I was talking with a brother on this subject, but he could not see the
truth. We happened to be drinking tea together, so I took a lump of sugar and
stirred it into the tea. A couple of minutes later I asked, "Can you tell where
the sugar is now and where the tea?" "No", he said, "they are both become one".
So the real meaning of baptism is that we are baptized into the death of Christ,
so that His death becomes ours and ours His. Our death and His are so closely
identified that it is impossible to distinguish between them. My baptism is my
admission that the death of Christ is a mighty all-inclusive death, mighty
enough and inclusive enough to destroy everything that is not of God.

## Resurrection unto Newness of Life
