---
order: 4
title: The True Nature of Consecration
description: Fourth article in the nine article series called The Normal Christian Life by Watchman Nee. This article was released in the May-June 1941 issue of a Witness and a Testimony.
layout: article
citation:
  year: 1941
  pages: 85-87
  pdfUrl: http://www.austin-sparks.net/pdf/searchable/AWAT1941.pdf#page=85&zoom=auto,-127,667
  accessDate: 17 Nov. 2021
---

Reading: Romans 6:12-23

The revelation of our death in the Lord is a definite thing. Many of us could
give the date when we clearly saw that Christ died for us, and we should be
equally clear as to the time when we saw that we died in Christ. It should be
nothing hazy, but very definite. It is not sufficient to acknowledge the truth,
we must see it. The fundamental thing is a revelation of our position in Christ
in His death, and a definite reception of His resurrection life. Then we shall
spontaneously reckon ourselves dead in Christ and alive in Him. Revelation is
fundamental to reckoning. With many Christians dying looms very large on their
horizon; they are always occupied with the thought of their death. But our death
with Christ is not future, it is past, it is an accomplished fact. Whether we
experience it or not, the fact is settled and settled for ever. George Muller
said, "One day George Muller died"; and we must be able to speak of our death as
definitely as he did of his. This reckoning is one of the steps that leads us
into the normal Christian life. The first step is revelation and the second is
reckoning. We must never reverse the order. Reckoning must always have
revelation as its basis.

## The Point at which Consecration Arises

"Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey the lusts
thereof: neither present your members as instruments of unrighteousness; but
present yourselves unto God as alive from the dead, and your members as
instruments of righteousness unto God" (Romans 6:12-13). We are dead and are
risen: now, on the basis of death and resurrection we must yield (present). From
verse 12 to verse 23 the most important word is "yield". Many have taken this
word to mean consecration, and rightly so; but it is not consecration as we
usually understand it. It is not consecration in the sense of offering talents,
gifts, strength, etc., to the Lord for Him to use. Note this clause in verse 13,
"as alive from the dead". The consecration here referred to is not the
consecration of anything belonging to the old creation, but of that which has
passed through death into resurrection. The yielding here spoken of is the
outcome of knowing my old man crucified and reckoning him to be so. Knowing,
reckoning, yielding, that is the Divine order. When I really _know_ I am already
crucified, then I spontaneously _reckon_ myself dead, and when I truly reckon
myself one with the Lord in death and resurrection, it follows that I will
_yield_ to Him. He is the source of my life, He _is_ my life: so I cannot but
yield everything to Him, for all is His, not mine. _Without passing through
death I have nothing to consecrate, and there is nothing God can accept, for He
has condemned all that is of the old creation to the Cross._ Death has cut off
all that cannot be consecrated to Him, and resurrection has made consecration
possible. Yielding merely means that I consider my whole life as belonging to
the Lord.

## The Presenting of the Body an All-inclusive Offering

Let us observe that this yielding is in relation to the members of the body. I
regard all my members as belonging wholly to the Lord. It is a great thing to
discover I am no longer my own: I am the Lord's. If the fifteen kroner in my
pocket belong to me, then I have full authority over them. But if they belong to
another who has committed them to me in trust, then I cannot buy what I please
with them; and I dare not lose them. Real Christian life begins _with_ knowing.
That results spontaneously in reckoning, and that again leads to yielding. How
many of us dare not use our own time or money or talents as we would, because we
realise they are the Lord's, not ours? How many of us have such a strong sense
that we belong to Another that we dare not squander a kroner of our money, or an
hour of our time, or any of our mental and physical powers? No one can really
live the normal Christian life without yielding everything to the Lord.

On a certain occasion a Chinese brother was travelling by train and found
himself together with three non-Christians who wished to play cards to while
away the time. Lacking a fourth to complete the game, they invited this brother
to join them. "I am sorry to disappoint you", he said, "but I cannot join your
game, for I have not brought my hands with me." "Whatever do you mean?" they
asked in blank astonishment. "This pair of hands does not belong to me", he
said: and then followed the explanation of the transfer of ownership that had
taken place in his life. That brother regarded the members of his body as
belonging entirely to the Lord: and that is true holiness.

## Separated unto the Lordâ€”The Lord's Right Over His Own

Many people think we become holy by the eradication of something evil within.
No, anything can become holy by being separated unto God. In Old Testament
times, if a man wished to be altogether the Lord's, then he was anointed with
oil and the Lord sanctified him. Thereafter he was regarded as set apart to the
Lord. In the same manner a lamb, or the gold in the temple, could be sanctified
to the Lord. "Holiness" in the original means something set apart, and all true
holiness is "holiness unto the Lord". I give myself over to Christ; that is
holiness. Yielding means, I recognize I am altogether the Lord's. This yielding
is a definite thing just as definite as reckoning. There must be a day in my
life when I pass out of my own hands into His hands, and from that day forward I
belong to Him and no longer to myself. That does not mean I consecrate myself to
be a preacher or a missionary. Many people are missionaries, not because they
have consecrated themselves to God, but because they have not consecrated
themselves to Him. Then to what are we consecrated? Not to Christian work, but
to the will of God; to be and to do whatever He wants.

David had many mighty men, of whom some were generals and others were
gatekeepers. We must be willing to be either generals or gatekeepers just as God
wills, not as we choose. If you are a Christian, then God has marked out a
pathway for you, a "course", as Paul calls it. Not only Paul's path, but the
path of every Christian has been clearly marked out by God, and it is of supreme
importance that each one should know and walk in the God-appointed course.
"Lord, I give myself to Thee with this desire alone, to know and walk in the
path you have ordained". That is true yielding. If at the close of a life we can
say with Paul, "I have finished my course", then we are blessed indeed. There is
nothing more tragic than to come to the end of life and find we have been on the
wrong course. We have only one life to live down here, and we can do as we
please with it. But if we seek our own pleasure our life will never glorify God.
A devoted Christian once said, "I want nothing for myself, I want everything for
God". Do _you_ want anything apart from God, or does all your desire centre in
His will?

## Servant or Slave?

If we yield unreservedly unto God, many adjustments may require to be made; in
family, business, or church relationships, or in the matter of our personal
views. God will not let anything of ourselves remain. His finger will touch,
point by point, everything that is not of Him, saying, "This must go". Are you
willing? It is foolish to resist God, and always wise to yield to Him. We admit
that many of us still have controversies with God. He wants something, while we
want something else. Many things we dare not look into, dare not pray about,
dare not even think about, lest we lose our peace. We can evade the issue, but
to do so will bring us out of the will of God. It is always an easy matter to
get out of His will, but it is a blessed thing just to hand ourselves over to
Him, and let Him have His way with us. How good it is to have the consciousness
that we belong to the Lord, and we are not our own. There is nothing more
precious in all the world. It is that which brings the consciousness of His
continual presence, and the reason is obvious. I must first have the sense of
God's possession of me before I can have the sense of His presence with me. When
this relationship with the Lord is established, then we dare do nothing on our
own initiative, for we are His exclusive property. "Know ye not, that to whom ye
present yourselves as servants unto obedience, his servants ye are whom ye
obey?" (Romans 6:16). The word here rendered "servant" really signifies a
"bondservant", a slave. This word used several times in the second half of
Romans 6. What is the difference between servant and slave? A servant may serve
another, but the ownership of himself does not pass to that other. If he likes
his master he can serve him; but if he does not like him he can refuse to serve
him. Not so is it with a slave. He is not only the servant of another, he is the
possession of another. How did I become the slave of the Lord? On His part He
bought me, and on my part I yielded myself to Him. By right of redemption we are
God's property, but if we would be His slaves we must willingly yield ourselves
to Him, for He will never coerce us.

## The Reality of the Issue

The tragic thing about Christians today is that they have no idea what God is
asking of them. How glibly they say, Lord, I am willing for anything. Do you
know that God is asking of you your very life? There are cherished ideals,
strong wills, precious relationships, much loved work that will have to go: so
do not give yourself to God unless you mean it. God will take you seriously,
even if you do not mean it seriously. When the Galilean boy brought his bread to
the Lord, what did the Lord do with it? He broke it. God will always break what
is offered to Him. He breaks what He takes, but after He breaks it He blesses
and uses it to meet the needs of others. After you give yourself to the Lord, He
begins to break what was offered to Him. Everything seems to go wrong, and you
protest and find fault with the ways of God. But to stay there is to be no more
than just a broken vessel; no good for the world, because you have gone too far
for the world to use you, and no good for God because you have not gone far
enough for Him to use you. You are out of gear with the world, and you have a
controversy with God. This is the tragedy of many a Christian.

Our yielding to the Lord must be a fundamental act. Then day by day we must go
on yielding to Him, not finding fault with His ways, but accepting with praise
even what the flesh revolts against. When you stand on that ground, then you are
truly yielded. A sister once prayed, "Lord, this is very hard, I don't like it,
but I am willing to break my heart to get Thy heart". One day I prayed with a
brother who could not get through in prayer. At length he said, "Lord, I don't
like it, but don't give in to me, just wait a moment; I will give in to You".

The normal Christian life begins with a crisis, when I see I am the Lord's and
thereafter no longer reckon myself to be my own, but in everything recognize His
ownership and authority . I do not consecrate myself to be a missionary, I
consecrate myself to do God's will; to do His will in school, office or kitchen,
counting whatever He ordains for me to be the very best, for nothing but good
can come to those who are wholly His.

May we always be possessed by the consciousness that we are not our own.
